---
title: Generic Feature Store API v1
---

# Generic Feature Store API v1

This describes the resources that make up the Generic Feature Store API v1. If
you have any problems or requests please contact
[the SeqWare team](mailto:seqware-users@lists.sourceforge.net).

**Note:** This API is under active development. Breaking changes can and will occur.

* <a href="#general-thoughts">General Thoughts</a>
* <a href="#client-errors">Client Errors</a>
* <a href="#http-verbs">HTTP Verbs</a>
* <a href="#authentication">Authentication</a>

## General Thoughts

Move this to the top document:

* the API should be self-documenting, a user should be able to do a get and look at the response and know how to navigate to the next level.  The details of how to query may not be clear and require the developer to look at the API documentation but the core URL traversal process should be totally obvious looking at the documents returned.

Most responses (unless noted) should have the following fields or nested data structures:

* id: a numeric identifier unique across the whole backend and not just this particular resource... use a UUID library
* URL: a resolvable URL for this document, can be used as an alternative identifier
* tags: a nested structure that lists out all the tags this entity has associated
* owner: the core owner, almost every resource has a direct owner. While other groups and users may have permissions this owner is the person that created this resource. An owner must be a user and not a group
* acl: ACL-style documents manage the permissions non-owners have on this resource, this includes both individual users and groups
* create_tstmp: a creation time for this resource, when a new version is created (through a edits) this create_tstmp applies to the version. Previous versions will indicate their create_tstmp as the update_tstmp field.  To find the original creation time look at the oldest version for its update_tstmp.
* updates: an array describing the version history for this resource and URLs to retrieve particular previous versions. Most resources will track their versions however very large resources like feature sets and features will use a copy on write approach instead and the analysis set and analysis resources to track versions. Since all resources but features are "cheap" to store we can afford to store all previous versions of them (some backend types give this functionality for free such as HBase).
* version: a URL for this resource that includes the version string. For the most recent version of a resource this is just an alternative URL for accessing it.
* the owner has full control (can do a GET, POST, PUT, DELETE and possibly others if the resource supports it) while permissions for other users and groups is controlled via the ACL.  There is one group, though, that is reserved in this system and that is the "admin" group.  If a user is added to this group they can manipulate any resource using any method it supports.
* most entities in the DB have a TTL that, by default for most objects, is set to FOREVER otherwise the lifetime in seconds. An object may be around that longer than this value but it is guarenteed to not be deleted until after the TTL has expired. The TTL is handy for "expensive" objects like features and feature sets that may have many copies made and we want to delete these as we go to recover extra space.
* deletes of reference sets and other set objects in the database, can we just mark these as delete rather than actually delete?  With the exception of maybe features which we would really like to delete to save space?  Really, it would be best to make this configurable.  So if the DB is being used for clinical then it would not allow for deletions or TTL deletions at all. Things would only be marked as delete and TTL would always be FOREVER. In another DB that is used for research maybe allows for deletes of all objects and a delete of a reference set or reference would delete all features.  I think we need this flexibility since some applications really need a paper trail whereas others do not.

## Client Errors

There are three possible types of client errors on API calls that
receive request bodies:

1. Sending invalid JSON will result in a `400 Bad Request` response.

        HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
        Content-Length: 35

        {"message":"Problems parsing JSON"}

2. Sending the wrong type of JSON values will result in a `400 Bad
   Request` response.

        HTTP/1.1 400 Bad Request
        Content-Length: 40

        {"message":"Body should be a JSON Hash"}

3. Sending invalid files will result in a 422 Unprocessable Entity
   response.

        HTTP/1.1 422 Unprocessable Entity
        Content-Length: 149

        {
          "message": "Validation Failed",
          "errors": [
            {
              "resource": "Issue",
              "field": "title",
              "code": "missing_field"
            }
          ]
        }

All error objects have resource and field properties so that your client
can tell what the problem is.  There's also an error code to let you
know what is wrong with the field.  These are the possible validation error 
codes:

missing
: This means a resource does not exist.

missing\_field
: This means a required field on a resource has not been set.

invalid
: This means the formatting of a field is invalid.  The documentation
for that resource should be able to give you more specific information.

already\_exists
: This means another resource has the same value as this field.  This
can happen in resources that must have some unique key (such as Label
names).

If resources have custom validation errors, they will be documented with
the resource.

## HTTP Verbs

Where possible, Generic Feature Store API v1 strives to use appropriate HTTP verbs for each
action.

HEAD
: Can be issued against any resource to get just the HTTP header info.

GET
: Used for retrieving resources.

POST
: Used for creating resources, or performing custom actions (such as
merging a pull request).

PUT
: Used for replacing resources or collections. For PUT requests
with no `body` attribute, be sure to set the `Content-Length` header to zero. 

DELETE
: Used for deleting resources.

## Authentication

There is one way to authenticate through Generic Feature Store API v1:

Basic Authentication:

<pre class="terminal">
$ curl -u "username:PASSWORD" https://api.github.com
</pre>

