!!!!The goal is to autogenerate:

* web service
* java web service client
* javascript web service client

!!!!The tech used appears to be:

* for data objects: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Persistence_API
* for REST: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jax-rs

!!!!The idea is this could:

* replace the existing web service
** improve coverage of tables
** improve speed
* replace the existing java client
** chance to cleanup a lackluster API
* possibly be a starting point for new versions of:
** portal
** future monitoring tools

Following: http://www.oracle.com/webfolder/technetwork/tutorials/obe/java/RESTfulWebServices/RESTfulWebservices.htm?print=preview

!!!!For the evaluation:

* generate the above
** possibly need simple script for making client
* test the querying and creating of objects in the DB... can I replicate the client from old SeqWare?
* implement a reporting endpoint... how hard is this?
* write a quick script that will test a few "big" queries on both WebServices
* write a quick markdown README.md that has the comparison results graphed and notes from here
* check into git
* will later need to deal with authentication... maybe just set it up so that only admins can connect to this service?

!!!!Problems:

* how would I make a war+XML and deploy in tomcat7?
* this seems like the way you create new templates: https://platform.netbeans.org/tutorials/nbm-filetemplates.html
* I'm interested in customizing: JpaControllersFromEntities
** look at ./j2ee.persistence/src/org/netbeans/modules/j2ee/persistence/wizard/jpacontroller/
* no pom.xml... looks like it's using Ant... WTF
* where do I add SSL, authentication, custom authentication against registration table, custom rules for authorization?
* everything works on ID... how hard to move to accession?
* I can use both tomcat7 and glassfish with J2EE6 however tomcat7 NPE when I do a GET request (while glassfish works). I think there's a difference in library versions that causes this?
* the OneToMany collections in the model are not populated yet the ManyToOne collections are!?
** looks like this is related to loops in the XML/Json... see @XmlTransient
** It looks like I will need to walk my tree and make sure @XmlTransient is going in the correct order Study->Exp->Sample etc.  If not I need to correct (probably not too bad) and may need to provide helper methods if I need bi-directional traversal.  See http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2219694/cyclic-serialisation-with-many-to-many-relationship-with-hibernate

=bash [=
This page http://jaxb.java.net/guide/Mapping_cyclic_references_to_XML.html in the "Unofficial JAXB Guide" offers three strategies for dealing with cycles. They are (in summary):

Mark one of the reference attributes that form the cycle as @XmlTransient.
Use @XmlID and @XmlIDREF so that the references are represented using XML ids arather than by containment.
Use the CycleRecoverable interface to deal with cycles programmatically.
=]

* it's not at all clear how persistence.xml gets configured to connect to a specific database... I had to do this in the GUI by editing the presistence.xml in the non-source view and setting up a new DB connection that way... really terrible, want this to be a clear setting somewhere 

!!!!Fixes:

* first, upgrade to the latest Netbeans 7.3 and make sure the plugins are upgraded... older versions did not work for me!
* in the Generated classes window when doing "New RESTful Web Services from Database" choose "Use Jersey..."
* FIXED, use JavaEE6 -- when setting up the initial web app choose Java EE 5 not 6 because of https://netbeans.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=216345
* FIXED, kinda, the NPE is no longer being thrown -- there is no logging in the web service... exceptions are ignored!  It looks like I can modify the template that generates these. But still, what a pain!
* FIXED, J2EE6 doesn't have this code -- the autogenerated code is really low quality, for example, no null checking:

=bash [=
      Collection<Lane> laneCollectionNew = organism.getLaneCollection();
      for (Lane laneCollectionNewLaneToAttach : laneCollectionNew) {
        laneCollectionNewLaneToAttach = em.getReference(laneCollectionNewLaneToAttach.getClass(), laneCollectionNewLaneToAttach.getLaneId());
        attachedLaneCollectionNew.add(laneCollectionNewLaneToAttach);
      }
=]

* server packages
** controller -> io.seqware.webservice.controller
** controller.exceptions -> io.seqware.webservice.controller.exceptions
** io.seqware.webservice.dao -> io.seqware.webservice.model
** service -> io.seqware.webservice.view
* client packages
** io.seqware.webservice.client.entitites -> io.seqware.webservice.model


!!!!Results:
 
* So this works... I get a REST web service and it works so long as I use the latest version of Netbeans.  It makes controller, entity, and REST web service classes.
* don't love the package layout... probably should customize for something better ordered
* generates identical entity classes for both client and server... should be common (just add to same project? Or use a seqware-common as we did before?)
* not using swagger https://developers.helloreverb.com/swagger/ although it does have a functional interactive web client... just not pretty

!!!!Client Code:

=bash [=
  public static void main(String args[])throws UniformInterfaceException
  {
    SeqWareWebserviceClient client1=new SeqWareWebserviceClient();


    // test writing
    Organism o=new Organism();
    o.setAccession("hsapien_2hg192");
    o.setName("Human3");
    //o.setCode("TEST3323Humann");
    o.setNcbiTaxid(1282291);
    //ClientResponse res = client1.create_XML(o);
        
    //System.out.println("HERE: "+res.getClientResponseStatus()+" HTTP STATUS CODE: "+res.getStatus());
    
    // now test query and retreival
    ClientResponse response=client1.findAll_XML(ClientResponse.class);
    GenericType<List<Organism>> genericType = new GenericType<List<Organism>>() {};
    // Returns an ArrayList of Players from the web service
    List<Organism> data= new ArrayList<Organism>();
    data=(response.getEntity(genericType)); 
    for(Organism org : data) {
      System.out.println("ORG: "+org.getName()+" "+org.getCode());
    }
    
    // update
    ClientResponse response1= client1.find_XML(ClientResponse.class,"3");
    Organism oldOrg = response1.getEntity(new GenericType<Organism>() {});
    oldOrg.setName(" foo ");
    oldOrg.setAccession("39239230");
    oldOrg.setNcbiTaxid(129291);
    System.out.println("NAME: "+oldOrg.getName()+" ID: "+oldOrg.getOrganismId());
    ClientResponse res2 = client1.edit_XML(oldOrg);
    System.out.println("DID THE UPDATE WORK?: "+res2.getClientResponseStatus()+" HTTP STATUS CODE: "+res2.getStatus());
    
  }
=]

!!!!Sample URLs:

* http://localhost:41217/seqware-webservice/webresources/io.seqware.webservice.model.workflowrun/566
* http://localhost:41217/seqware-webservice/webresources/io.seqware.webservice.model.processing/43


!!!!Running

=bash [=
# manually running:

boconnor@oslo ~/Development/gitroot/seqware-sandbox/seqware-webservice/target $ java -cp classes:/usr/local/glassfish-3.1.2.2/glassfish/lib/*:/usr/local/glassfish-3.1.2.2/glassfish/modules/* io.seqware.webservice.client.SeqWareWebserviceClient

=]
